# Virtual Environments

---
---

## Introduction
- A virtual environment is basically a python environment which is seperate from your main python environment.

- You can install external modules (which are not built-in in python) in the virtual environment without affecting the main environment.

- Virtual environments makes managing these modules easier as you can quickly create / discard them.

- You can also create a specific virtual environment with ONLY modules required for a project you are working on.
    - For example, a virtual environment for web-scraping, django and machine learning project.
    - All 3 virtual environments can be isolated from each other and contain modules specific only to them.

- Use **'venv'** (a built-in module in python) to create these virtual environments.

---

## Create the Virtual Environment
__Syntax__:
```bash
python -m venv <virtual environment name> <optional parameters>
```

__Example 1:__
```bash
python -m venv .venv-python-basics
```

__Example 2:__
```bash
python -m venv .venv-python-basics --upgrade-deps
```
**Note**: upgrade-deps - makes sure your virtual environment has the latest version of modules (such as pip) at the time of creation.

---

## Activate Virtual Environment
- Navigate to the folder where the virtual environment folder is.

- __In this example:__
```bash
.\.venv-python-basics\Scripts\activate
```

- If you get an error while trying to activate the script in powershell, please watch this video [Change Execution Policy in Powershell](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6unR4CP-kuE) and try running the above again.

- Or you can try running the above command in cmd.

---

## How to know virtual environment is activated?
- You will see the the name of your virtual environment in the terminal.

---

## How to install a module in the virtual environment?
- Install it like you would normally.

- __Syntax:__
```bash
pip install <module name>
```

- __Example: To install the module 'requests', execute the following command:__
```bash
pip install requests
```

- It will only be installed in the virtual environment.

---

## See list of installed modules
```bash
pip freeze
```

---

## Deactivate the virtual environment
- Just run the 'deactivate' command:
```bash
deactivate
```

---

## Now that we are in the main environment, let's check list of modules in python again
```bash
pip freeze
```
- The module 'requests' is not present.